introduce type unions in the handbook (#3572)
github/codeql: docs/language/ql-handbook/types.rst

    }
    
.. _type-unions:

Type unions
***********

.. note::
    The syntax for type unions is considered experimental and is subject to change.
    However, type unions appear in the `standard QL libraries <https://github.com/github/codeql>`__.
    The following sections should help you understand those examples.

Type unions are user-defined types that are declared with the keyword ``class``.
The syntax resembles :ref:`type aliases <type-aliases>`, but with two or more type expressions on the right-hand side.

Type unions are used for creating restricted versions of an existing :ref:`algebraic datatype <algebraic-datatypes>`, by explicitly
selecting a subset of the branches of that datatype and binding them to a new type.
Type unions of :ref:`database types <database-types>` are also supported.

You can use a type union to explicitly restrict the permitted branches from an algebraic datatype
and resolve spurious :ref:`recursion <recursion>` in predicates.
For example, the following construction is legal::

    newtype T =
      T1(T t) { not exists(T2orT3 s | t = s) } or
      T2(int x) { x = 1 or x = 2 } or
      T3(int x) { x = 3 or x = 4 or x = 5 }

>     class T2orT3 = T2 or T3;

Reviewer: This example looks slightly wonky. If I understand the semantics correctly, it seems that the `T1` branch would end up being empty, because every possible binding for `t` will be rejected by `not exists(T2orT3 s | t = s)`.

Can we find a less vacuous example? I can't off the top of my head come up with something that doesn't need an auxiliary predicate, but perhaps something like
```ql
newtype T =
    T1(int x) { x in [ 1..9] and not exists(T2orT3 s | x = extract(s) } or
    T2(int x) { x = 1 or x = 2 } or
    T3(int x) { x = 3 or x = 4 or x = 5 }

class T2orT3 = T2 or T3;

int extract(T2orT3 t) { t = T2(result) or t = T3(result) }
```

Author: True, that example comes for one of the PR tests and is pretty vacuous. Yours looks better.
It would probably be even nicer to have something more inspired by real code, but I don't have a good insight into that. Perhaps @dbartol would know what to do?

Reviewer: Hmm, how about something like (for at least a smell of program analysis)
```ql
newtype InitialValueSource =
    ExplicitInitialization(VarDecl v) { exists(v.getInitializer()) } or
    ParameterPassing(Call c, int pos) { exists(c.getParameter(pos)) } or
    UnknownInitialGarbage(VarDecl v) { not exists(DefiniteInitialization di | v = target(di)) }

class DefiniteInitialization = ParameterPassing or ExplicitInitialization;

VarDecl target(DefiniteInitialization di) {
   di = ExplicitInitialization(result) or
   exists(Call c, int pos | di = ParameterPassing(c, pos) and
                            result = c.getCallee().getFormalArg(pos))
}
```

Author: That looks great, thank you very much for taking the time to come up with this!

selecting a subset of the branches of that datatype and binding them to a new type.
Type unions of :ref:`database types <database-types>` are also supported.

You can use a type union to give a name to a subset of the branches from an algebraic datatype.
In some cases, using the type union over the whole algebraic datatype can avoid spurious
:ref:`recursion <recursion>` in predicates.
For example, the following construction is legal::

    newtype InitialValueSource =
        ExplicitInitialization(VarDecl v) { exists(v.getInitializer()) } or
        ParameterPassing(Call c, int pos) { exists(c.getParameter(pos)) } or
        UnknownInitialGarbage(VarDecl v) { not exists(DefiniteInitialization di | v = target(di)) }

    class DefiniteInitialization = ParameterPassing or ExplicitInitialization;

    VarDecl target(DefiniteInitialization di) {
       di = ExplicitInitialization(result) or
       exists(Call c, int pos | di = ParameterPassing(c, pos) and
                                result = c.getCallee().getFormalArg(pos))
    }

However, a similar implementation that restricts ``InitialValueSource`` in a class extension is not valid.

> If we had implemented ``DefiniteInitialization`` as a class extension instead, it would trigger a type test for ``InitialValueSource``. This results in an illegal recursion ``DefiniteInitialization -> InitialValueSource -> UnknownInitialGarbage -> ¬DefiniteInitialization`` since ``UnknownInitialGarbage`` relies on ``DefiniteInitialization``::

Reviewer: I'm still slightly worried about the distance between the hypothetical wording "if we had implemented" and the code block. Readers in a hurry could easily miss the former and take the example as an example of good QL (or even assume that it's what the union type definition _desugars to_). Can we at least add a `// THIS WON'T WORK` to the code block?

Author: thanks for the suggestion, I did that

selecting a subset of the branches of that datatype and binding them to a new type.
Type unions of :ref:`database types <database-types>` are also supported.

You can use a type union to give a name to a subset of the branches from an algebraic datatype.
In some cases, using the type union over the whole algebraic datatype can avoid spurious
:ref:`recursion <recursion>` in predicates.
For example, the following construction is legal::

    newtype InitialValueSource =
        ExplicitInitialization(VarDecl v) { exists(v.getInitializer()) } or
        ParameterPassing(Call c, int pos) { exists(c.getParameter(pos)) } or
        UnknownInitialGarbage(VarDecl v) { not exists(DefiniteInitialization di | v = target(di)) }

    class DefiniteInitialization = ParameterPassing or ExplicitInitialization;

    VarDecl target(DefiniteInitialization di) {
       di = ExplicitInitialization(result) or
       exists(Call c, int pos | di = ParameterPassing(c, pos) and
                                result = c.getCallee().getFormalArg(pos))
    }

However, a similar implementation that restricts ``InitialValueSource`` in a class extension is not valid.

> The class ``DefiniteInitialization`` triggers a type test for ``InitialValueSource``, which results in an illegal recursion

Reviewer: Perhaps make it clearer that the following snippet is a _different_ hypothetical construction than the one in the main example above:
```suggestion
If we had written ``DefiniteInitialization`` as a class extension instead, if would trigger a type test for ``InitialValueSource``, which results in an illegal recursion
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, I have added it with slight modifications.

    class Tainted extends TaintType, TTaintedValue {
    }
    
.. _type-unions:

Type unions
***********

Type unions are user-defined types that are declared with the keyword ``class``.
The syntax resembles :ref:`type aliases <type-aliases>`, but with two or more type expressions on the right-hand side.

Type unions are used for creating restricted subsets of an existing :ref:`algebraic datatype <algebraic-datatypes>`, by explicitly
selecting a subset of the branches of that datatype and binding them to a new type.
Type unions of :ref:`database types <database-types>` are also supported.

You can use a type union to give a name to a subset of the branches from an algebraic datatype.
In some cases, using the type union over the whole algebraic datatype can avoid spurious
:ref:`recursion <recursion>` in predicates.
For example, the following construction is legal::

>     newtype InitialValueSource =
>         ExplicitInitialization(VarDecl v) { exists(v.getInitializer()) } or
>         ParameterPassing(Call c, int pos) { exists(c.getParameter(pos)) } or
>         UnknownInitialGarbage(VarDecl v) { not exists(DefiniteInitialization di | v = target(di)) }
> 
>     class DefiniteInitialization = ParameterPassing or ExplicitInitialization;
> 
>     VarDecl target(DefiniteInitialization di) {
>        di = ExplicitInitialization(result) or
>        exists(Call c, int pos | di = ParameterPassing(c, pos) and
>                                 result = c.getCallee().getFormalArg(pos))
>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    newtype InitialValueSource =
      ExplicitInitialization(VarDecl v) { exists(v.getInitializer()) } or
      ParameterPassing(Call c, int pos) { exists(c.getParameter(pos)) } or
      UnknownInitialGarbage(VarDecl v) { not exists(DefiniteInitialization di | v = target(di)) }

    class DefiniteInitialization = ParameterPassing or ExplicitInitialization;

    VarDecl target(DefiniteInitialization di) {
      di = ExplicitInitialization(result) or
      exists(Call c, int pos | di = ParameterPassing(c, pos) and
                                result = c.getCallee().getFormalArg(pos))
    }
```

I've changed the indentation to 2 spaces (in line with the [style guide](https://github.com/github/codeql/blob/master/docs/ql-style-guide.md#indentation)).

    class Tainted extends TaintType, TTaintedValue {
    }
    
.. _type-unions:

Type unions
***********

.. note::

>     The syntax for type unions is considered experimental and is subject to change.

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't call this syntax experimental. Are we really not committed to it?

Author: I added this note (based on the note from algebraic datatypes) because of my understanding that this was an internal-only feature currently. I suppose that's not actually what the wording says though, I will remove it.

    However, type unions appear in the `standard QL libraries <https://github.com/github/codeql>`__.
    The following sections should help you understand those examples.

Type unions are user-defined types that are declared with the keyword ``class``.
The syntax resembles :ref:`type aliases <type-aliases>`, but with two or more type expressions on the right-hand side.

> Type unions are used for creating restricted versions of an existing :ref:`algebraic datatype <algebraic-datatypes>`, by explicitly

Reviewer 3: I think this would be a better term:

```suggestion
Type unions are used for creating restricted subsets of an existing :ref:`algebraic datatype <algebraic-datatypes>`, by explicitly
```

selecting a subset of the branches of that datatype and binding them to a new type.
Type unions of :ref:`database types <database-types>` are also supported.

> You can use a type union to explicitly restrict the permitted branches from an algebraic datatype
> and resolve spurious :ref:`recursion <recursion>` in predicates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use a type union to give a name to a subset of the branches from an algebraic datatype.
In some cases, using the type union over the whole algebraic datatype can avoid spurious
:ref:`recursion <recursion>` in predicates.
```
